application: nrf_desktop: Align docs after upmerge + migration to sysbuild (#15998)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: applications/nrf_desktop/bootloader_dfu.rst

Configuring the B0 bootloader
=============================

To enable the B0 bootloader, select the :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_APPCORE` Kconfig option in the sysbuild configuration.
It automatically enables the :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_BUILD_S1_VARIANT_IMAGE` option to construct the application binaries for both application's slots in non-volatile memory.

The B0 bootloader additionally requires enabling the following options:

* In the sysbuild configuration:

>   * :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_SIGNING_KEY_FILE` - Required for providing the signature used for image signing and verification.

Reviewer: `... for providing the signature key file used ...` (if the option is not provided B0 uses autogenerated keys)

* In the application configuration:

  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FW_INFO` - Required for the application versioning information.

>   * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION` - Enable this option to set the version of the application after you enabled :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FW_INFO`.

Reviewer: `Set value of this option to update application version`?

    The nRF Desktop application with the B0 bootloader configuration builds two application images: one for the S0 slot and the other for the S1 slot.
    To generate the DFU package, you need to update this configuration only in the main application image as the ``s1_image`` child image mirrors it.

>     You can do that by rebuilding the application from scratch or by changing the configuration of the main image through menuconfig.

Reviewer: The last sentence is actually not needed (the option is updated as any other Kconfig)

Configuring the B0 bootloader
=============================

To enable the B0 bootloader, select the :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_APPCORE` Kconfig option in the sysbuild configuration.
It automatically enables the :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_BUILD_S1_VARIANT_IMAGE` option to construct the application binaries for both application's slots in non-volatile memory.

The B0 bootloader additionally requires enabling the following options:

* In the sysbuild configuration:

>   * :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_SIGNING_KEY_FILE` - Required for providing the signature key file used for image signing and verification.

Reviewer 2: The decision was to change  to \``SB_CONF_...``

    If this Kconfig option does not specify the signature key file, automatically generated signature key files will be used by default.

* In the application configuration:

  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FW_INFO` - Required for the application versioning information.
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION` - Set value of this Kconfig option to update application version.
    The nRF Desktop application with the B0 bootloader configuration builds two application images: one for the S0 slot and the other for the S1 slot.
    To generate the DFU package, you need to update this configuration only in the main application image as the ``s1_image`` image mirrors it.

.. _nrf_desktop_configuring_mcuboot_bootloader:

Configuring the MCUboot bootloader
==================================

> To enable the MCUboot bootloader, select the :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT` Kconfig option in the sysbuild configuration.

Reviewer 2: Also here :kconfig:option:\`SB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT` -> \``SB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT``

> The MCUboot private key path (:kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_BOOT_SIGNATURE_KEY_FILE`) must be also set in the sysbuild configuration.

Reviewer 2: And here \``SB_CONFIG_BOOT_SIGNATURE_KEY_FILE``

  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION` - Set value of this Kconfig option to update application version.
    The nRF Desktop application with the B0 bootloader configuration builds two application images: one for the S0 slot and the other for the S1 slot.
    To generate the DFU package, you need to update this configuration only in the main application image as the ``s1_image`` image mirrors it.

.. _nrf_desktop_configuring_mcuboot_bootloader:

Configuring the MCUboot bootloader
==================================

To enable the MCUboot bootloader, select the :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT` Kconfig option in the sysbuild configuration.

The MCUboot private key path (:kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_BOOT_SIGNATURE_KEY_FILE`) must be also set in the sysbuild configuration.
The key is used both by the build system (to sign the application update images) and by the bootloader (to verify the application signature using public key derived from the selected private key).
If this Kconfig option is not overwritten in the sysbuild configuration, debug signature key files located in the MCUboot bootloader repository will be used by default.

> To set specific version of the application, use the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMGTOOL_SIGN_VERSION` Kconfig option in the application configuration.

Reviewer: I would consider to add small notes that for B0 and MCUboot+XIP we need to bump application version for DFU update image (otherwise DFU fails).

Configuring the B0 bootloader
=============================

To enable the B0 bootloader, select the ``SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_APPCORE`` Kconfig option in the sysbuild configuration.
It automatically enables the ``SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_BUILD_S1_VARIANT_IMAGE`` option to construct the application binaries for both application's slots in non-volatile memory.

The B0 bootloader additionally requires enabling the following options:

* In the sysbuild configuration:

  * ``SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_SIGNING_KEY_FILE`` - Required for providing the signature key file used for image signing and verification.

>     If this Kconfig option does not specify the signature key file, automatically generated signature key files will be used by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    If this Kconfig option does not specify the signature key file, the application will use the default files.
```

Author: Discussed.
Decided to change whole bulletpoint to:
```
  * ``SB_CONFIG_SECURE_BOOT_SIGNING_KEY_FILE`` - Required for providing the signature key file used by the build system (to sign the application update images) and by the bootloader (to verify the application signature).
    If this Kconfig option does not specify the signature key file, debug signature key files will be used by default.
```

* In the application configuration:

>   * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FW_INFO` - Required for the application versioning information.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FW_INFO` - Required for providing information about the application versioning.
```

>   * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION` - Set value of this Kconfig option to update application version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION` - Required for updating the application version.
```
To align it

    The nRF Desktop application with the B0 bootloader configuration builds two application images: one for the S0 slot and the other for the S1 slot.

>     To generate the DFU package, you need to update this configuration only in the main application image as the ``s1_image`` image mirrors it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    To generate the DFU package, update this configuration only in the main application image. 
    The ``s1_image`` image will mirror it automatically.
```

.. note::

>     To ensure that update image will be booted, the generated update image's version number must be greater than the version number of application image running on device.

Reviewer: `To ensure that update image will be booted after a successful DFU image transfer, ...`

Reviewer: For both occurrences of the note

>     To ensure that update image will be booted after a successful DFU image transfer, the generated update image's version number must be greater than the version number of application image running on device.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    To ensure that update image will boot after a successful DFU image transfer, the update image's version number must be higher than the version number of the application image running on device.
```

    Otherwise the update image can be rejected by the bootloader.

.. _nrf_desktop_configuring_mcuboot_bootloader:

Configuring the MCUboot bootloader
==================================

To enable the MCUboot bootloader, select the ``SB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT`` Kconfig option in the sysbuild configuration.

> The MCUboot private key path (``SB_CONFIG_BOOT_SIGNATURE_KEY_FILE``) must be also set in the sysbuild configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You must also set the MCUboot private key path (``SB_CONFIG_BOOT_SIGNATURE_KEY_FILE``) in the sysbuild configuration.
```

The key is used both by the build system (to sign the application update images) and by the bootloader (to verify the application signature using public key derived from the selected private key).

> If this Kconfig option is not overwritten in the sysbuild configuration, debug signature key files located in the MCUboot bootloader repository will be used by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If this Kconfig option is not overwritten in the sysbuild configuration, the application will use debug signature key files located in the MCUboot bootloader repository.
```

> To set specific version of the application, use the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMGTOOL_SIGN_VERSION` Kconfig option in the application configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To select a specific version of the application, set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMGTOOL_SIGN_VERSION` Kconfig option in the application configuration.
```

If the nRF Desktop application is configured with the MCUboot in the direct-xip mode, the build system builds two application images: one for the primary slot and the other for the secondary slot named ``mcuboot_secondary_app``.

> You need to update this configuration only in the main application image as the ``mcuboot_secondary_app`` image mirrors it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You need to update this configuration only in the main application image, as the ``mcuboot_secondary_app`` image mirrors it.
```

.. note::
    To ensure that update image will be booted, the generated update image's version number must be greater than the version number of application image running on device.

>     Otherwise the update image can be rejected by the bootloader.

Reviewer: IIRC This applies only to MCUboot with XIP (not to MCUboot with swap). It may be worth to mention it.

>     When the MCUboot bootloader is in the direct-xip mode, to ensure that update image will be booted after a successful DFU image transfer, the generated update image's version number must be greater than the version number of application image running on device.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    When the MCUboot bootloader is in direct-xip mode, the update image must have a higher version number than the application currently running on the device. 
    This ensures that the update image will be booted after a successful DFU image transfer.
```

.. note::
    To ensure that update image will boot after a successful DFU image transfer, the update image's version number must be higher than the version number of the application image running on device.
    Otherwise the update image can be rejected by the bootloader.

.. _nrf_desktop_configuring_mcuboot_bootloader:

Configuring the MCUboot bootloader
==================================

To enable the MCUboot bootloader, select the ``SB_CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT`` Kconfig option in the sysbuild configuration.

You must also set the MCUboot private key path (``SB_CONFIG_BOOT_SIGNATURE_KEY_FILE``) in the sysbuild configuration.
The key is used both by the build system (to sign the application update images) and by the bootloader (to verify the application signature using public key derived from the selected private key).
If this Kconfig option is not overwritten in the sysbuild configuration, debug signature key files located in the MCUboot bootloader repository will be used by default.

To select a specific version of the application, set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_IMGTOOL_SIGN_VERSION` Kconfig option in the application configuration.

> If the nRF Desktop application is configured with the MCUboot in the direct-xip mode, the build system builds two application images: one for the primary slot and the other for the secondary slot named ``mcuboot_secondary_app``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the nRF Desktop application is configured with the MCUboot in the direct-xip mode, the build system builds two application images: one for the primary slot and the other for the secondary slot, named ``mcuboot_secondary_app``.
```

You need to update this configuration only in the main application image, as the ``mcuboot_secondary_app`` image mirrors it.

.. note::

>     When the MCUboot bootloader is in direct-xip mode, the update image must have a higher version number than the application currently running on the device.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    When the MCUboot bootloader is in the direct-xip mode, the update image must have a higher version number than the application currently running on the device.
```

    This ensures that the update image will be booted after a successful DFU image transfer.

>     Otherwise the update image can be rejected by the bootloader.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Otherwise, the update image can be rejected by the bootloader.
```

  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FW_INFO` - Required for the application versioning information.
  * :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FW_INFO_FIRMWARE_VERSION` - Enable this option to set the version of the application after you enabled :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_FW_INFO`.
    The nRF Desktop application with the B0 bootloader configuration builds two application images: one for the S0 slot and the other for the S1 slot.

>     To generate the DFU package, you need to update this configuration only in the main application image as the ``s1_image`` image mirrors it.

Reviewer: This belongs to the previous commit

The direct-xip mode is used for the :ref:`background DFU <nrf_desktop_bootloader_background_dfu>`.
In this mode, the MCUboot bootloader boots an image directly from a given slot, so the swap operation is not needed.
To set the MCUboot mode of operations to the direct-xip mode, make sure to enable the :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_MODE_DIRECT_XIP` Kconfig option in the sysbuild configuration.
This option automatically enables :kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_BUILD_DIRECT_XIP_VARIANT` to build application update images for both slots.

> The nRF Desktop application do not enable the direct-xip mode with revert mechanism (:kconfig:option:`SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_MODE_DIRECT_XIP_WITH_REVERT`).

Reviewer: `... nRF Desktop application configurations do not use ...` ?

The ``CONFIG_BOOT_DIRECT_XIP`` Kconfig option is automatically applied to the bootloader configuration based on the sysbuild configuration to make the MCUboot run the image directly from both image slots.
Similarly, the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_BOOTLOADER_MODE_DIRECT_XIP` Kconfig option is automatically applied to the application configuration based on the sysbuild configuration to inform the application in which mode the MCUboot bootloader works.
When the direct-xip mode is enabled, the application modules that control the DFU transport do not request firmware upgrades and do not confirm the running image.

> In that scenario, the MCUboot bootloader simply boots the image with the higher image version.

Reviewer: Can we also update MCUboot with serial recovery doc? (we also need to set some Sysbuild configurations in that case)

The direct-xip mode is used for the :ref:`background DFU <nrf_desktop_bootloader_background_dfu>`.
In this mode, the MCUboot bootloader boots an image directly from a given slot, so the swap operation is not needed.
To set the MCUboot mode of operations to the direct-xip mode, make sure to enable the ``SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_MODE_DIRECT_XIP`` Kconfig option in the sysbuild configuration.

> This option automatically enables ``SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_BUILD_DIRECT_XIP_VARIANT`` to build application update images for both slots.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This option automatically enables the ``SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_BUILD_DIRECT_XIP_VARIANT`` Kconfig option, which builds the application update images for both slots.
```

> The nRF Desktop application configurations do not use the direct-xip mode with revert mechanism (``SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_MODE_DIRECT_XIP_WITH_REVERT``).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The nRF Desktop application configurations do not use the direct-xip mode with the revert mechanism (``SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_MODE_DIRECT_XIP_WITH_REVERT``).
```

> The ``CONFIG_BOOT_DIRECT_XIP`` Kconfig option is automatically applied to the bootloader configuration based on the sysbuild configuration to make the MCUboot run the image directly from both image slots.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ``CONFIG_BOOT_DIRECT_XIP`` Kconfig option enables MCUboot to run the image directly from both image slot, and it is automatically applied to the bootloader configuration based on the sysbuild configuration. 
```

> Similarly, the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_BOOTLOADER_MODE_DIRECT_XIP` Kconfig option is automatically applied to the application configuration based on the sysbuild configuration to inform the application in which mode the MCUboot bootloader works.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Similarly, the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_BOOTLOADER_MODE_DIRECT_XIP` Kconfig option, that informs the application about the MCUboot bootloader's mode, is also applied automatically based on the sysbuild configuration.
```

Tried to make it flow better - not sure if achieved, please double-check

> When the direct-xip mode is enabled, the application modules that control the DFU transport do not request firmware upgrades and do not confirm the running image.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the direct-xip mode is enabled, the application modules that control the DFU transport do not request firmware upgrades or confirm the running image.
```

The direct-xip mode is used for the :ref:`background DFU <nrf_desktop_bootloader_background_dfu>`.
In this mode, the MCUboot bootloader boots an image directly from a given slot, so the swap operation is not needed.

> To set the MCUboot mode of operations to the direct-xip mode, make sure to enable the ``SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_MODE_DIRECT_XIP`` Kconfig option in the sysbuild configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To set the MCUboot mode of operations to the direct-xip mode, enable the ``SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_MODE_DIRECT_XIP`` Kconfig option in the sysbuild configuration.
```

This option automatically enables the ``SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_BUILD_DIRECT_XIP_VARIANT`` Kconfig option, which builds the application update images for both slots.
The nRF Desktop application configurations do not use the direct-xip mode with the revert mechanism (``SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_MODE_DIRECT_XIP_WITH_REVERT``).

> The ``CONFIG_BOOT_DIRECT_XIP`` Kconfig option enables MCUboot to run the image directly from both image slot, and it is automatically applied to the bootloader configuration based on the sysbuild configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ``CONFIG_BOOT_DIRECT_XIP`` Kconfig option enables MCUboot to run the image directly from both image slots, and it is automatically applied to the bootloader configuration based on the sysbuild configuration.
```

In the :ref:`USB serial recovery <nrf_desktop_bootloader_serial_dfu>` mode, the MCUboot bootloader uses a built-in foreground DFU transport over serial interface through USB.
The application is not involved in the foreground DFU transport, therefore it can be directly overwritten by the bootloader.
Because of that, the configuration with the serial recovery mode requires only a single application slot.

> To set the MCUboot mode of operations to single application slot, make sure to enable the ``SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_MODE_SINGLE_APP`` Kconfig option in the sysbuild configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To set the MCUboot mode of operations to single application slot, enable the ``SB_CONFIG_MCUBOOT_MODE_SINGLE_APP`` Kconfig option in the sysbuild configuration.
```

By default, both the GPIO pin and the LED are defined in the board's DTS file.
See :file:`boards/nordic/nrf52833dongle/nrf52833dongle_nrf52833.dts` for an example of board's DTS file used by the nRF Desktop application.

> For an example of bootloader Kconfig configuration file defined by the application, see the MCUboot bootloader ``debug`` configuration defined for nRF52833 dongle (:file:`applications/nrf_desktop/configuration/nrf52833dongle_nrf52833/images/mcuboot/prj.conf`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For an example of a bootloader Kconfig configuration file defined by the application, see the MCUboot bootloader ``debug`` configuration defined for nRF52833 dongle (:file:`applications/nrf_desktop/configuration/nrf52833dongle_nrf52833/images/mcuboot/prj.conf`).
```
